The Joe Rogan experience. It just seems.
Like in the beginning,
at least they're trying to figure out what the correct treatment was for these
people, as they were just showing up in mass in the emergency rooms.
And they didn't really know, and doctors, they varied in how the approach to it.
My friend, Michael, his doctor didn't put him on a ventilator. And he said,
if I put him on a ventilator, he's probably going to die. Right.
Because he said his body's going to stop working.
Cause it's going to let the ventilator do the breathing forum and it's going to
give up. And when he was talking about, uh, after the fact,
what Michael was talking about was how that is proven to be correct in New York
and that some monstrous number,
like 80% of the people that put on ventilators went up done just.
New York. I like I've had friends that are physicians that have like, you know,
and, uh, new Orleans. I mean the same thing where it's like a, you know, I,
there was someone on my team. We were looking,
we were doing some research on this and I,
and I didn't sort of dive into the whole thing, but he was,
he was telling me that, um, ventilators do actually like,
cause more damage to the lungs. And like,
like he'd been reading some studies to like confirm that.
And he was pretty certain that that ventilators actually cause damage and
actually could like induce damage where it's like making it worse.
So I don't know. I don't know all the specifics so that all I know is that it,
it looking at the statistics, like if you go on a ventilator, I mean,
surely it seems like the outcome's not very,
it doesn't seem like it's going to be very good. Right, right.
But it's hard to say, is that the cause of it?
Or is it just that they're so up by the time they get on a ventilator,
they just wind up dying. Right?
Well, here at lake, the,
there's been some really interesting data looking at like in the there,
so in the Philippines, um, and Indonesia,
where else I think new Orleans as well. Um,
they've looked at patients that have died and their vitamin D levels.
And in Britain basically like in the Philippines, you know,
people that for like every standard deviation increase in vitamin D levels,
serum, vitamin D levels, you know,
the people had like an 8% or were eight fold,
eight times less likely to have a severe form of COVID-19. And if they had,
and they were 20 times less likely to have critical like critic critical, um,
form of COVID-19, um, in the, in the,
so that was the Philippines in the Indonesia was a really interesting study
where like they measured vitamin D and this was measured in the patients.
There's been some vitamin D studies also where they're like looking at,
you know, countries that have been affected the worst.
And they all like have low vitamin D and it's like, okay, well, anyways,
that's correlation, but, well, so is this, but, um, a little,
it's a little stronger data. The, in the, in Indonesia, um,
patients that died 90 about almost a hundred percent,
it was like 98 point something percent of patients that died with COVID-19 were
vitamin D deficient
4% of patients that died from COVID-19 we're vitamin D sufficient or say
4%, only 4%,
uh we're fi vitamin D sufficient. So basically they're all vitamin D deficient,
all the ones that are dying. Whoa. Crazy. Right.
And like new Orleans had some crazy, crazy number,
be the mechanism that would cause, so I think there's all right. Can we cut?
Can we get into vitamins, please do. It's a big, I really think.
Because of you, I take a 5,000, I use a day.
Awesome. Um, right now I'm taking 5,000. I use a day, um, you know,
70% of the U S population has insufficient vitamin D levels,
which is considered less than, um, blood levels, less than 30 milligrams,
nanograms per milliliter.
Then your body can generate naturally.
If you're exposed to sun on a daily basis, that's the best way to get it. But.
The problem is is that we don't go outside anymore. And you.
Know, yeah. Especially now exactly now more than ever, but.
Terrible recipe, right?
If vitamin D deficiency is what makes it worse and then you're staying inside.
So you're not getting any vitamin D.
You're becoming even more deficient, you know, like third,
like somewhere like 28% of the U S population is actually deficient like less
than 20 nanograms per mil, you know, that's defined deficiency.
So there's a lot of people in the United States. Um, as you mentioned,
you make it from the sun. So particularly UVB radiation.
There's a reason why I want to talk about this. Uh, you make it from UVB,
radiation exposure, you know, basically it's made in the skin. And, um,
but you know, there's certain times of the year,
depending on when you live in a more Northern latitude where that UVB isn't even
hitting the atmosphere. So you're not making vitamin D also,
if you have darker skin, melanin protects you like the whole, you know,
people with darker skin, people from maybe Africa or India or south Asia,
they're more equatorial regions. They're closer, you know, closer to, to,
to the equator. And there's more UVB radiation throughout the year.
And so as a protective mechanism to not get burned,
you have melanin, which protects you. Right? The problem is,
is that melanin also blocks your, your ability to produce vitamin D.
But if you're out in the sun all the time, you know,
in a place where you're getting UVB radiation, it's not a problem.
Well,
this is the very reason why people in places like Scotland and England have such
pale skin exactly cloudy all the time.
So your body sort of develops its own ability to absorb more vitamins. Exactly.
So what.
Happens when you take something?
What happens when you take a person from south Asia, from India,
from Africa and you put them in Sweden or in Minnesota or in the UK
and a place where UVB radiation doesn't hit most of the year
and you don't give them a supplement.
What happens is they become severely vitamin D deficient.
Severely. And what happens when.
You take it? I mean, I mean, you can throw this on the, you can flip,
flip this over and say, okay, what happens when you take the guy from the UK,
the Brit and put them in Australia?
Like without any sunscreen or without a hat or number they're gonna yeah.
So mean.
Do you think that this could be a factor in why so many African-Americans are
getting hit so hard?
So here's the thing. So African-Americans are, there's lots of, alright.
African-Americans are, are, are in, in, in the United States,
there's been studies, um, African-Americans are severely deficient.
They're 28 times more deficient in vitamin D than, than Caucasians.
Wow. Yeah. And it's, it's,
it's because it's because they have darker skin and you know,
if you're not getting enough sun,
they're not getting enough sun because people stay inside,
more people stay inside. You know, it's not,
it's not like the old days when we were out hunter gatherer and out in the sun,
all the temporary and our like we're inside all the time. We're in school,
we're, we're, we're at work and our office in our cubicle. Um, so the CDC,
you know,
obviously there's been studies showing that African-Americans are more hit,
but they didn't really correct for tons of like other factors.
Cause socioeconomic status is important. Uh, hell. Other health factors,
you know? And, um, but there was a big study just released not long ago from,
from like the national office of statistics in Britain or something like that.
I don't know what their official name was, but they released, um,
some statistics from England and Wales and the, um,
I don't know what the correct name to say. I mean, the,
the blacks they're basically living in England and in Wales are four times
more likely to die of COVID-19 than, than whites. When they,
when they adjusted all that data for socioeconomic status.
And for other health factors, there were two times more likely to die.
So clearly socioeconomic status and other health factors are playing a role,
but through something else unidentified.
And I think it's vitamin D I think that, you know, so, you know,
the vitamin D like it hasn't looked vitamin D I'm not saying that vitamin D is
going to prevent you from getting COVID-19 or it's a treatment.
Although I am involved in a clinical study where we're going to be testing as a
very small open-armed study, we can talk about, but you know,
I'm not a physician, I'm a medical doctor. I've never intubated anyone. Uh,
so don't think I'm saying that I don't want people to think I'm saying it's a
treatment. I just want to, it's a hypothesis that needs to be tested.
And thankfully there are clinical trials,
randomized control trials that are now ongoing,
and there are some that are recruiting.
It's just the statistics that you've already listed about vitamin D and the
people that had COVID-19, those are insane.
It's insane. And also in Sweden,
there's a huge population of Somalis that have migrated to Sweden.
And they have been identified as being severely vitamin D deficient
because a lot of the Somalis have all there also like autism rates were really
high there.
And there's this link between I published a link also between vitamin D and
autism. But so there's been studies looking at vitamin D levels in the Somali
population. I mean, they are so deficient because you're taking again,
you're taking someone who's supposed to be who's, you know,
evolved to be getting a lot of sun, um, but not burn from it.
And then,
and then putting them in a place where they can't get any vitamin D from the
sun. And if they don't get a supplement, like they're going to be deficient,
you know, and they're so much more likely they're, they're like, it's,
it's wreaking havoc in Sweden on the Somali population is so logical. Yeah.
It's it's it's and then, okay, so elderly,
elderly are like insanely more deficient. I forgot the exact number obese.
Also the obese people are like three times more likely to be vitamin D deficient
in the United States, because vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin,
and it's less, it's been shown to be 50% less bioavailable.
So you have to re after you make it in your skin,
it's stored in fat and you know, it's released. And when, you know,
basically into the bloodstream, and then it gets converted into a hormone,
this hormone regulates 5%,
more than 5% of the human protein and Cody human genome.
It's a lot of G that's a whole, it's a hormone. Like,
can you imagine just walking around without testosterone? You're a man,
that's a hormone. I mean, like,
cause there's a lot of people that are deficient in vitamin D and it's a steroid
hormone. It gets converted into a hormone like this. Isn't just a vitamin,
you know, it's important. It's really important. Um,
so I went off on a tangent, but anyways, uh.
Can I ask you this boy, we're off on this tangent? What is,
when you see what is happening to people when they are vitamin D like what's
happening in the vitamin D deficient,
what is happening in the body that's causing their immune system, this,
this hormone deficiency,
not having this vitamin D whether it's through sun exposure.
So there's lots of things.
I mean, it plays a key there's vitamin D receptors on like your immune cells.
And,
and the reason for that is because when the hormone vitamin D hormone binds to
the receptor,
it activates all these genes and that the genes do stuff that are regulating
immune function. You know, there's, there's studies that have shown people.
And I love these studies because,
because they basically take away people's complaints about, you know,
there's lots of epidemiological studies showing that low vitamin D is associated
with disease X, Y, or Z. And everyone's like, well, you know,
they're out in this, they're not in the sun as much. So they're not as healthy.
They're not as physically active and not whatever,
even though those confounding factors are usually correct it for it's old
at the end of the day, it's a, it's an association, right?
And everyone's like correlations, not causation, which is true.
But sometimes you gotta like, look at the full body of data, you know, um,
there are genetic polymorphisms. So,
so there are people that have variations in genes that caused them to
genetically have lower vitamin D. And so this,
this is called [inaudible] randomization.
When you can take a person that's that has a genetically they're genetically low
vitamin D. So you're not categorizing them based on their vitamin D levels.
You're categorizing them based on their gene.
And those people are more likely to die from respiratory infections just based
on that gene alone. So yeah,
that gene that it's known to lower it lowers by them.
It leads to lower vitamin D levels. And so like,
those people are more likely to die from respiratory infections than people that
don't have that,
which is a great way of kind of randomizing people by their genes,
as opposed to doing a randomized control trial. Those have been done as well.
There was a study that was over 25 randomized controlled trials.
People that were given a vitamin D supplement varying doses,
either weekly or daily, monthly didn't work. Um,
they're the people with low baseline vitamin D levels.
So people that were like deficient,
they were 50% less likely to have a respiratory tract infection.
If they were taking the vitamin D supplement over 50% actually.
And people that had already normal levels still had a protective effect,
there was 10% less likely.
So even people that were already considered normal taking a buy vitamin D
supplement helped prevent the respiratory tract.
Infection. You take too much vitamin D yes, you can. You can too much. So,
right.
So the, the upper, the tolerable upper intake has been set by, um,
the nutrition board and the Institute of medicine to be 4,000, I use a day. Um,
but there's been studies that have shown that, um, you can, I mean,
people that have taken, you know, 10,000 I use a day for, for multiple years,
haven't had any hypercalcemia or had, you know, um, problems,
but too much vitamin D can be toxic. It's not good to take that. Um,
it's best to like get a vitamin D blood test. And I think that personally, um,
there has been a trend.
So people that have blood levels higher than 60 may have just a little bit
higher calcium level,
but not much not like it's not like anything to be hugely concerned about,
but there are studies also showing that either vitamin K one.
So there's been a meta analysis looking at, uh, 12 different studies, I think,
where vitamin K one or vitamin K two were given,
and both of those improved bone mineral density and prevented any
hypercalcemia. Cause when you take vitamin D you absorb calcium better,
like something crazy, like 40% more dietary calcium is being absorbed. Wow. So,
so the problem is,
is that calcium can easily form a precipitate in, in,
in general.
And particularly when phosphorus is around and phosphorus is another thing
vitamin D does increase the absorption of. Um, but again, like I said,
you know, it's like,
it's really hard to find any studies where vitamin D is causing, you know,
hypercalcemia, unless it's like really, really high dose for, for awhile. Um,
I personally think taking the vitamin K and what's interesting about the vitamin
K one versus vitamin K2 with,
without going into too much of a tangent is basically, um, the,
the vitamin K one.
Normally it goes to your liver and it's involved in blood coagulation,
but when there's enough vitamin K one around,
it stays in the periphery and it moves calcium periphery being bloodstream.
It moves calcium out of the bloodstream and takes it to places where it's
supposed to go like the bones and the muscle. Um,
vitamin K2 usually stays around the periphery.
It doesn't really go to the liver. So it usually,
that's usually what it's just doing is moving calcium out and bringing it to the
bones. And so I take a, I actually have K one in my multi that I take,
but I also take a K2 supplement, MK four, I take it like a couple times a week.
And what dose you're taking for K one, well.
The K ones in my multi. So I don't vitamin K one is, um,
really it's found in dark leafy greens. So I get a lot of those as well.
I get a lot. So I'm getting a lot of Q1. Um,
vitamin K2 is not as, it's not as readily found in like the Western. I mean,
it's like the food that's highest in it is that fermented swiping natto,
but it's like small quantities. And like.
You don't forget concerned from the high volume of leafy greens.
Do you ever get conservative oxalates or getting kidney stones or anything along
those lines? No, I.
D I like the few studies that I've seen and send people that are like doing
insane juicing and they're already like messed up, you know?
So I'm not concerned at all. Like, even like the oxalates oxalates, actually,
I don't want to go into this, but so yeah, no, I don't concern kids, kids here.
I want the vitamin D thing is so important to me. Like the, the, um,
the reason there's a big reason. I think that vitamin D is so important. Um,
it's for the lung function and the respiratory function,
but what's really interesting is that, you know, the,
the very receptor that this SARS cov two virus binds to,
to gain entry into the cell, it's called ACE two. Um,
that very receptor plays a really important role in preventing
lung damage and, and basically in preventing acute lung injury,
preventing acute respiratory distress syndrome, ARDS,
and what's been shown with SARS cov.
One is that cause Sarco one also binds to that receptor ACE two, it's called,
and that's how it gets into the cell. Just like the SARS cov two, when,
when it binds the receptor, it like it attaches in like,
through this like weird endo cytosis mechanism,
it takes the receptor in and decreases the receptor.
What's called down-regulates downregulates receptors.
You end up having less H two,
which causes like D can cause to be your lung injury, not having the AEs to,
it plays a big role in protecting, that's been shown in multiple studies. Like,
so the SARS cov one virus does that it's thought the SARS cov two also does it,
cause it goes through the same enters through the same receptor. Um,
and it's been shown that like, if you, for example, if you give mice, um,
lipopolysaccharide or something that's going to cause lung injury,
and then you give them vitamin D.
So the lung injury itself also causes the ACE two receptor to decrease.
And so it's like this vicious cycle of like making the damage worse.
But if you give my Spider-Man D before that happens,
the ACE two receptor increases and it protects them from the lung injury.
But you give the vitamin D to control mice that don't have the lung injury.
It doesn't do anything to the ACE two receptor levels.
So it's not like full stop. It's not like, you know, drugs,
the way drugs are designed is they, like,
they target a certain molecule and they boom,
they like do their thing and they either increase it or decrease it a lot of
times with like hormones, you know, vitamins, things like that. They're they,
they maintain homeostasis. You know what I mean? Like, so when,
when goes wrong, they fix it. They're not just like boom, full,
gonna like increase something when everything's normal. So,
and that's important because there've been some concern about taking vitamin D
increasing the ACE two receptor.
And there's another study that was with hypertensive rats,
where the hypertension caused ACE two to go down and that like makes lung,
it makes all sorts of problems.
It also causes like kidney problems and all sorts of things. Right. Um, but,
but the vitamin D increase the ACE two, but only in the hypertensive, rats,
not in the normal control rats again. So, you know,
and then there was another study that was like some other messed up diabetic
animal model where the vitamin D actually, um,
didn't increase the ACE two receptor,
but it increased what's called soluble ACE two,
which is in like it's in the periphery.
And that actually potentially could bind SARS,
cov two virus and prevent it from it's like sequestering it and preventing it
from entering the cell.
That's actually being explored as a potential therapeutic.
So the bottom line here is that
sometimes you'll hear this ACE two receptor and that's how the virus gets in.
And it's like, oh, I don't want that. I want,
I want less than that because that's how the virus gets in. But like,
like biology is always way more complicated than just a simple taking it
out of a big picture. Right. You know? So like the ACE two receptor,
the ACE two is part of the renin angiotensin system.
It plays a huge role in inflammation. It's also like when you,
when you decrease,
[inaudible] all of these signal signaling cascades happen in it. It's like,
[inaudible] important for producing pro-inflammatory cytokines at the end of the
day, without getting into all the stuff, you know, specifics.
So it causes massive inflammation to have a decrease. It, it,
it basically causes acute lung injury. It exacerbates it. I mean, it's crazy.
So, um, I really, I just,
I really can you imagine if vitamin D really did help?
Like if there was something that could be given along with the other stuff from
Desi or whatever, whatever it's going to be, the stuff that we identify,
but like vitamin D so, so cheap, it's so easy.
And so many people are deficient and insufficient, you know, like,
so yes, as you mentioned, there is, you know,
you don't want to take too much vitamin D you don't want to like, you know,
overdose on it. But I think in the short term, uh, you know,
particularly like in the short term, and particularly in patients,
people that have already been infected, you know, it may be wise to, to,
to try giving your patient, like, if you're a physician, um, you know,
dealing with this may,
may be wise to try and see their vitamin D levels and perhaps give them some,
you know, explored.
Pub. I mean, is this something that people are talking about publicly? Cause I,
all I'm hearing is drugs and possible drug remedies,
potential vaccine that they're working on in the future.
I'm not hearing anything about methods,
nutrition that boosts your immune system.
This is one of the reasons why I really wanted to talk to you right now. Yeah.
Let's definitely talk more there. Yes.
It is. So there are clinical studies, unfortunately,
not a ton of them in the United States that are looking at randomized controlled
trials, looking at vitamin D the effects of vitamin D on already, you know,
patients with COVID-19,
which what would be great is like giving them to like first responders or
healthcare workers and seeing like, how does it, how does it, what does,
what role does it play in prevention? Cause that's really the easiest thing,
right? Um, I'm involved with a friend of mine, Dr. Eric Gordon.
He he's put together. So I kind of, with his help,
I've helped him design a, uh, an open arm trial,
very small 40 patients where we're, um,
where he is going to be giving them 50,000.
I use every five days of vitamin D. So it's like a weekly dose. Um,
because a lot of times these people are severely deficient.
So you want to give them a higher dose, you know, and, and for, you know, doing,
doing 50,000, I use weekly,
isn't something that's necessarily going to be toxic or anything like that. Um,
and then we're gonna, you know, we're doing some other things, vitamin C um,
three grams, three times a day. And then, um, bitumen B one,
we can talk about that timing as well. But so yeah, there are,
I think there's like open label trial,
open label trials are just kind of a start it's like, if you,
if you see something, plus we're doing like kitchen sink, right. We've got this,
this and this and this. So I think vitamin D really is the, is the star,
you know, I think that potentially, you know,
I think it really should be explored. Um, I think it has huge potential.
It has to be shown like this. Isn't something that people can just, you know,
take it home and think I'm protected. Like that is not the case.
We don't know that it has, there's no data showing that,
but I think it has huge potential. Um, you know, so.
One do a randomized control study on vitamin D and people that
have COVID-19 like, it seems like, well, they're going to do it.
In addition to, they're going to, in addition to standard of care.
So it's basically whatever the standard of care is. And that's,
that's what you know, is happening at the a hundred and hospital in India.
But as.
You said,
it seems like what's really critical is getting it to people before they get it.
Yeah.
I would love to see that study done if anyone can do that study.
Amazing. That would be, cause that would be like.
Yeah, get it to nurses, get it to first responders. Yeah. Or even.
Just get the information out there and have nursery nurses,
and first responders take it. I mean, you know, vitamin D is something, again,
like 70% of the us population has insufficient levels. You know,
it's a crazy number. It is. And it's generally safe to take like,
like 4,000 I use a day. It is, I am, but for thousands, the, the T the,
the, what the, they indicated as the tolerable upper intake.
So why do you take five?
I'm just taking 5,000 right now because that's like the, I could buy the five.
I was like, I didn't want to take two pills of the 2000. Right. Well, that's me.
Too. I've got one pill. It's 5,000. And I'm like, well, so I had my, my levels.
Measured, literally. Like I went to LA to quest quest labs,
like a month before all this lockdown happened. So I got my data back pretty,
pretty recent. And I still have around 50 nanograms per mil,
even though before I was taking 4,000, it didn't generally speaking.
1000 I use will raise your blood levels by about five nanograms per mil.
And there are people with different variations in genes that are related to
vitamin D metabolism, where they have lower levels and they need a higher dose.
The only way you're going to know that is by of course,
measuring your vitamin D levels multiple times,
and then potentially even doing like a, a genetic analysis, you know, as well,
but you'd have to measure your levels. Like, that's the only way to know. Um,
of course, right now it's like,
you can't go to a lab it's like hard to do any of that. I mean,
th the things that are like normal.
Yeah. But right now when you need it.
But the vitamin D I mean, I'm just so, like, I just, I have so much,
I have high hopes for it, you know, and maybe,
maybe I'm a bit of an enthusiastic with it. You know, I do like,
I've studied vitamin D so much. I've got two publications on. I certainly like,
you know, you said, so, you know, take that with a grain of salt as well.
But I just think the data is strong. I really think the data is,
I think it's mounting data.
And I think that eventually something will come out and it's going to just like
the randomized controlled trials showing that it protects against respiratory
tract infections, push everyone wants randomized controlled trials.
Like no one wants to believe anything until it's a randomized control trial.
Yeah. I'm just, I'm amazed.
That the numbers of people that are deficient it's so stunning.
And when we pointed out the number of people that are deficient,
that actually wind up having severe COVID-19 problem. Right. Yeah. I.
Know it's stunning. Like some of those numbers, like.
The missing link, it's like, it's right there. I.
Think that's a really good hypothesis. I do.
I think it's a really good hypothesis. I want to believe it because it's easy,
it's safe. And I think people need vitamin D anyways. I mean, yeah. You know,
so, so of course I want to believe it, you know? Um, but like, oh,
there was this interesting study where African-Americans,
who are very deficient in vitamin D.
They were given a vitamin D supplement for like a month.
And it decreased their epigenetic age by like two years.
I mean, yeah. So that's a marker a month. Something like a month, I think. Yeah.
In a month.
They decrease their epigenetic age by two. Yeah. Okay. Don't hold.
Me to the month. Maybe give me some month or two months. But I think.
It was even if it's three months, that's crazy.
The studies are about a month. Yeah. So it, yeah, by 1.8 years. So.
What's in indicative of their suffering from this vitamin D deficiency,
this alleviates that suffering. And then it puts the body in homeostasis.
Hormone. Yeah. Hormone. It's.
Changing 5% of the human genome. That's a lot. It's a lot.
It's a lot. Yeah. That's a crazy number. When you think.
About it, it is one vitamin D it's not just a vitamin, right? Yeah. Hormone,
super vitamin. Can you imagine it's like, it happens when you.
Go into menopause. Well, you're not making your estrogen. I mean,
stuff goes wrong. I mean, it's a hormone like estrogen, estrogen is a hormone,
you know, testosterone is a hormone, it's a hormone, you know, it's, it's,
it's important. So.
So that's the,
if you have the Dr. Rhonda Patrick pyramid of
supplementation for preventative symptoms of COVID-19 or
preventative measures dealing with COVID-19,
that's your base that's number one.
I take vitamin D I certainly don't know if it's going to prevent COVID-19.
But I'm hoping it does. Yeah. I take it hoping it, but.
I'm not even saying preventative. I mean, like keeping your body healthy.
Totally. I mean, my mom, I've got my mom and my dad, I got.
My whole family everyone's on the routine, you know,
vitamin D is like the most important,
so that's the foundation's vitamin D right now. Yeah. I mean, it's, it,
I'm always trying to get them to have that, but like,
it's easier to convince when people are scared.
People are more likely to make change when, like, you can't like, if something,
they have to be motivated to make the change themselves or just otherwise it
doesn't work. You know? So I think that in this case, um,
people are motivated,
especially people in my parents' generation that are older because they're,
they're more scared.
They're more scared that they could be effected by a severe case of
this. Right. So, so I think that's, that's certainly, you know, the issue.